Let's get some practice with the basic low-level command for
the Debian packaging system, dpkg, or d-package.
So, to get a list of all the packages on this system,
I can simply type "dpkg --list".
And I'll just pipe that into "less", because it's a long list [dpkg --list | less].
Okay, actually, if I don't use "less", for some reason, it's more compact.
Okay, so there are a lot of different packages on the system.
Now, if I want to see some information just about a particular package,
I could just grep, let's say, bzip2 to see what's going on with bzip2 [dpkg --list | grep bzip2].
And that's the information about bzip2 that tells us the version number,
the architecture, which here is amd64,
and it's description as a high quality block sorting file compressor utility.
So it's a more advanced program of better compression than gzip or
the old fashion zip program.
If I want to see what's actually contained in that package,
I can do "dpkg --listfiles", and then the name of it [dpkg --listfiles bzip2].
And then I'll go slower by putting into less [dpkg --listfiles bzip2 | less].
And you see there is the executables in the /bin directory.
And then what's under /user is basically documentation.
Under /user/share/doc, /user/share/man, etc.
If I try to remove the package,
let's see what happens.
So do "sudo dpkg" and, of course,
I have to have root privilege to remove the package.
So I'm removing bzip2, "sudo dpkg --remove bzip2".
And it's telling me I cannot do this because I need the development package,
dpkg-dev, that would be headers and
stuff for programs which use this in a library version.
And fire-roller, which is an archive extractor that's prominent on Linux
systems, so I would have to remove all three of them.
We'll see later when we use tools like apt-get,
it's easier to deal with these dependencies.